---
title: "Algorithms and Data Structures"
open: true
date: 2019-10-30
---

From wikipedia

# Algorithms

In mathematics and computer science, an algorithm (/ˈælɡərɪðəm/ (About this
soundlisten)) is a sequence of instructions, typically to solve a class of
problems or perform a computation. Algorithms are unambiguous specifications for
performing calculation, data processing, automated reasoning, and other tasks.

As an effective method, an algorithm can be expressed within a finite amount of
space and time[1] and in a well-defined formal language[2] for calculating a
function.[3] Starting from an initial state and initial input (perhaps
empty),[4] the instructions describe a computation that, when executed, proceeds
through a finite[5] number of well-defined successive states, eventually
producing "output"[6] and terminating at a final ending state. The transition
from one state to the next is not necessarily deterministic; some algorithms,
known as randomized algorithms, incorporate random input.[7]

The concept of algorithm has existed since antiquity. Arithmetic algorithms,
such as a division algorithm, was used by ancient Babylonian mathematicians
circa 2500 BC and Egyptian mathematicians circa 1550 BC.[8] Greek mathematicians
later used algorithms in the sieve of Eratosthenes for finding prime numbers,
and the Euclidean algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor of two
numbers.[9] Arabic mathematicians such as Al-Kindi in the 9th century used
cryptographic algorithms for code-breaking, based on frequency analysis.[10]

The word algorithm itself is derived from the 9th-century mathematician Muḥammad
ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī, Latinized Algoritmi. A partial formalization of what
would become the modern concept of algorithm began with attempts to solve the
Entscheidungsproblem (decision problem) posed by David Hilbert in 1928. Later
formalizations were framed as attempts to define "effective calculability"[11]
or "effective method".[12] Those formalizations included the
Gödel–Herbrand–Kleene recursive functions of 1930, 1934 and 1935, Alonzo
Church's lambda calculus of 1936, Emil Post's Formulation 1 of 1936, and Alan
Turing's Turing machines of 1936–37 and 1939.

# Data structures

In computer science, a data structure is a data organization, management, and
storage format that enables efficient access and modification.[1][2][3] More
precisely, a data structure is a collection of data values, the relationships
among them, and the functions or operations that can be applied to the data.[4]

## Lorem 

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod
tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At
vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren,
no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.

### Ipsum

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod
tempor invidunt ut labore et dolore magna aliquyam erat, sed diam voluptua. At
vero eos et accusam et justo duo dolores et ea rebum. Stet clita kasd gubergren,
no sea takimata sanctus est Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.
