---
title: "Computer Networks"
date: 2019-10-06
---

# Introduction

A computer network is a digital telecommunications network which allows nodes to
share resources. In computer networks, computing devices exchange data with each
other using connections (data links) between nodes. These data links are
established over cable media such as twisted pair or fiber-optic cables, and
wireless media such as Wi-Fi.

Network computer devices that originate, route and terminate the data are called
network nodes.[1] Nodes are generally identified by network addresses, and can
include hosts such as personal computers, phones, and servers, as well as
networking hardware such as routers and switches. Two such devices can be said
to be networked together when one device is able to exchange information with
the other device, whether or not they have a direct connection to each other. In
most cases, application-specific communications protocols are layered (i.e.
carried as payload) over other more general communications protocols. This
formidable collection of information technology requires skilled network
management to keep it all running reliably.

Computer networks support an enormous number of applications and services such
as access to the World Wide Web, digital video, digital audio, shared use of
application and storage servers, printers, and fax machines, and use of email
and instant messaging applications as well as many others. Computer networks
differ in the transmission medium used to carry their signals, communications
protocols to organize network traffic, the network's size, topology, traffic
control mechanism and organizational intent. The best-known computer network is
the Internet.

## History

The chronology of significant computer-network developments includes:

In the late 1950s, early networks of computers included the U.S. military radar
system Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE).

In 1959, Anatolii Ivanovich Kitov proposed to the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union a detailed plan for the re-organisation of
the control of the Soviet armed forces and of the Soviet economy on the basis of
a network of computing centres, the OGAS.[2]

In 1959, the MOSFET (MOS transistor) was invented by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon
Kahng at Bell Labs.[3] It later became the basic building block[4][5][6] of
computer network communications infrastructure[7][8][9] such as transceivers,
base station modules, routers, RF power amplifiers,[10] microprocessors, memory
chips and telecommunication circuits.[11]

In 1960, the commercial airline reservation system semi-automatic business
research environment (SABRE) went online with two connected mainframes.

In 1963, J. C. R. Licklider sent a memorandum to office colleagues discussing
the concept of the "Intergalactic Computer Network", a computer network intended
to allow general communications among computer users.

In 1964, researchers at Dartmouth College developed the Dartmouth Time Sharing
System for distributed users of large computer systems. The same year, at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a research group supported by General
Electric and Bell Labs used a computer to route and manage telephone
connections.

Throughout the 1960s, Paul Baran and Donald Davies independently developed the
concept of packet switching to transfer information between computers over a
network. Davies pioneered the implementation of the concept with the NPL
network, a local area network at the National Physical Laboratory (United
Kingdom) using a line speed of 768 kbit/s.[12][13][14]

In 1965, Western Electric introduced the first widely used telephone switch that
implemented true computer control.

In 1966, Thomas Marill and Lawrence G. Roberts published a paper on an
experimental wide area network (WAN) for computer time sharing.[15]

In 1969, the first four nodes of the ARPANET were connected using 50 kbit/s
circuits between the University of California at Los Angeles, the Stanford
Research Institute, the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the
University of Utah.[16] Leonard Kleinrock carried out theoretical work to model
the performance of packet-switched networks, which underpinned the development
of the ARPANET.[17][18] His theoretical work on hierarchical routing in the late
1970s with student Farouk Kamoun remains critical to the operation of the
Internet today.

In 1972, commercial services using X.25 were deployed, and later used as an
underlying infrastructure for expanding TCP/IP networks.

In 1973, the French CYCLADES network was the first to make the hosts responsible
for the reliable delivery of data, rather than this being a centralized service
of the network itself.[19]

In 1973, Robert Metcalfe wrote a formal memo at Xerox PARC describing Ethernet,
a networking system that was based on the Aloha network, developed in the 1960s
by Norman Abramson and colleagues at the University of Hawaii. In July 1976,
Robert Metcalfe and David Boggs published their paper "Ethernet: Distributed
Packet Switching for Local Computer Networks"[20] and collaborated on several
patents received in 1977 and 1978.

In 1974, the first TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) specification, RFC 675
(Specification of Internet Transmission Control Program), was written by Vint
Cerf, Yogen Dalal and Carl Sunshine. The paper coined the term "Internet" as a
shorthand for internetworking.[21]

In 1976, John Murphy of Datapoint Corporation created ARCNET, a token-passing
network first used to share storage devices.

1977, first long-distance fiber network deployed by GTE in Long Beach,
California.

In 1977, Xerox Network Systems (XNS) was developed by Robert Metcalfe and Yogen
Dalal at Xerox.[22]

In 1979, Robert Metcalfe pursued making Ethernet an open standard.[23]

In 1980, Ethernet was upgraded from the original 2.94 Mbit/s protocol to the 10
Mbit/s protocol, which was developed by Ron Crane, Bob Garner, Roy Ogus,[24] and
Yogen Dalal.[25]

In 1995, NSFNet was decommissioned and transitioned to the private sector.

In 1995, the transmission speed capacity for Ethernet increased from 10 Mbit/s
to 100 Mbit/s. By 1998, Ethernet supported transmission speeds of a Gigabit.
Subsequently, higher speeds of up to 400 Gbit/s were added (as of 2018). The
ability of Ethernet to scale easily (such as quickly adapting to support new
fiber optic cable speeds) is a contributing factor to its continued use.[23]

