---
name: "Mathematical Analysis"
date: 2019-10-06
---

# Mathematical Analysis

Mathematical analysis is the branch of mathematics dealing with limits and
related theories, such as differentiation, integration, measure, infinite
series, and analytic functions.[1][2]

These theories are usually studied in the context of real and complex numbers
and functions. Analysis evolved from calculus, which involves the elementary
concepts and techniques of analysis. Analysis may be distinguished from
geometry; however, it can be applied to any space of mathematical objects that
has a definition of nearness (a topological space) or specific distances between
objects (a metric space).

## History

Mathematical analysis formally developed in the 17th century during the
Scientific Revolution,[3] but many of its ideas can be traced back to earlier
mathematicians. Early results in analysis were implicitly present in the early
days of ancient Greek mathematics. For instance, an infinite geometric sum is
implicit in Zeno's paradox of the dichotomy.[4] Later, Greek mathematicians such
as Eudoxus and Archimedes made more explicit, but informal, use of the concepts
of limits and convergence when they used the method of exhaustion to compute the
area and volume of regions and solids.[5] The explicit use of infinitesimals
appears in Archimedes' The Method of Mechanical Theorems, a work rediscovered in
the 20th century.[6] In Asia, the Chinese mathematician Liu Hui used the method
of exhaustion in the 3rd century AD to find the area of a circle.[7] Zu Chongzhi
established a method that would later be called Cavalieri's principle to find
the volume of a sphere in the 5th century.[8] The Indian mathematician Bhāskara
II gave examples of the derivative and used what is now known as Rolle's theorem
in the 12th century.[9]

In the 14th century, Madhava of Sangamagrama developed infinite series
expansions, like the power series and the Taylor series, of functions such as
sine, cosine, tangent and arctangent.[10] Alongside his development of the
Taylor series of the trigonometric functions, he also estimated the magnitude of
the error terms created by truncating these series and gave a rational
approximation of an infinite series. His followers at the Kerala School of
Astronomy and Mathematics further expanded his works, up to the 16th century.

The modern foundations of mathematical analysis were established in 17th century
Europe.[3] Descartes and Fermat independently developed analytic geometry, and a
few decades later Newton and Leibniz independently developed infinitesimal
calculus, which grew, with the stimulus of applied work that continued through
the 18th century, into analysis topics such as the calculus of variations,
ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier analysis, and generating
functions. During this period, calculus techniques were applied to approximate
discrete problems by continuous ones.

In the 18th century, Euler introduced the notion of mathematical function.[11]
Real analysis began to emerge as an independent subject when Bernard Bolzano
introduced the modern definition of continuity in 1816,[12] but Bolzano's work
did not become widely known until the 1870s. In 1821, Cauchy began to put
calculus on a firm logical foundation by rejecting the principle of the
generality of algebra widely used in earlier work, particularly by Euler.
Instead, Cauchy formulated calculus in terms of geometric ideas and
infinitesimals. Thus, his definition of continuity required an infinitesimal
change in x to correspond to an infinitesimal change in y. He also introduced
the concept of the Cauchy sequence, and started the formal theory of complex
analysis. Poisson, Liouville, Fourier and others studied partial differential
equations and harmonic analysis. The contributions of these mathematicians and
others, such as Weierstrass, developed the (ε, δ)-definition of limit approach,
thus founding the modern field of mathematical analysis.

In the middle of the 19th century Riemann introduced his theory of integration.
The last third of the century saw the arithmetization of analysis by
Weierstrass, who thought that geometric reasoning was inherently misleading, and
introduced the "epsilon-delta" definition of limit. Then, mathematicians started
worrying that they were assuming the existence of a continuum of real numbers
without proof. Dedekind then constructed the real numbers by Dedekind cuts, in
which irrational numbers are formally defined, which serve to fill the "gaps"
between rational numbers, thereby creating a complete set: the continuum of real
numbers, which had already been developed by Simon Stevin in terms of decimal
expansions. Around that time, the attempts to refine the theorems of Riemann
integration led to the study of the "size" of the set of discontinuities of real
functions.

Also, "monsters" (nowhere continuous functions, continuous but nowhere
differentiable functions, space-filling curves) began to be investigated. In
this context, Jordan developed his theory of measure, Cantor developed what is
now called naive set theory, and Baire proved the Baire category theorem. In the
early 20th century, calculus was formalized using an axiomatic set theory.
Lebesgue solved the problem of measure, and Hilbert introduced Hilbert spaces to
solve integral equations. The idea of normed vector space was in the air, and in
the 1920s Banach created functional analysis.
